Words and pictures, or possibly words versus pictures, with particular reference to science
fiction as the subject of our discussion today, with me are Theodore Sturgeon, whose stature
as a writer we have noted in the past.
His most recent collection of stories is called Visions and Venturers.
Lloyd Bigel, a writer currently on the faculty at Eastern Michigan University, his stories
have appeared widely in various science fiction magazines, including the New Omni.
And he has had some fourteen books published.
And James R. Oddbert, an illustrator whose work is accompanied stories by Theodore Sturgeon,
including the New Visions and Venturers, and any number of other science fiction writers.
He hails from Minneapolis, where I understand Gordon Dixon also comes from.
Gordon Dixon's new book, Pro, was illustrated by Mr. Oddbert.
Jim, what in your view is the role of the illustrator, particularly in science fiction?
Are you a crutch for the author or an equal?
Well, not an equal, but I certainly hope not a crutch.
The illustrator, I feel the illustrator should embellish the story.
He adds to it, gives it more richness and depth with the illustrations, particularly if he can
work closely with the author so that he can let you see things that the author did not
describe, but had in mind when he was doing the story.
I mentioned Gordon Dixon.
Was he influential in getting you started, let's say, in illustrating science fiction?
Well he was influential in getting me into the book illustration part of it.
I've been doing illustration for quite some time, but when I got into the books,
Gordy was very influential in getting me started in book illustration.
What other kinds of work have you done?
My founding, my basis, was in industrial design, which actually works nicely in the illustration,
particularly the hardware and the technical end of it.
Do you find it difficult on occasion to do something to accompany a story?
Not really. More it's difficult finding the real feel of the story and doing the illustration to
fit the feel. The things are not difficult. It's the feeling that it's harder to find and to bring
to the process.
There have been very few really great illustrators down through the years. My own experience,
I'm reminded of NC Wyeth and people like that illustrating Stevenson and other writers,
but their names simply don't stand out. I guess one reason is that not too many of the older
books actually contained illustrations or very few illustrations. So often today one gets the
impression that the illustration is an aid to the child or perhaps the semi-literate adult in
getting him over the problem of reading. How do you feel about that, Mr. Sturgeon?
In an interesting time, we haven't had any illustrations at all. Earlier, however,
they did. I can remember a turn of the century books that always had a Francis piece and often
then these very careful stealing gravings and woodcuts and things like that all the way through.
We got away from that. We're getting back to it again. And more and more you'll find interior
illustrations in books. Some publishers and editors like Byron Price in New York are doing
a whole series of novels which are almost half and half illustration and copy, which is very
interesting. I wonder how to hand a palm to Mr. Albert here. He's Jim Albert. He really and truly
reads what he illustrates. It happens that this copy of Vision's Inventure has fell into my hands
last night. For the very first time, the local B. Dalton bookstore made a special effort and got
them out pre-publication. It'll probably be out generally next week. But they got into stock. How
I don't know. I've tried to do this myself and failed. And the manager down there is really on
top of it. And so I had my first look at it and at Jim's drawings last night. I was very, very
pleased. He clearly has carefully read each story. And as he said, the feel of it. He's gotten that
over very well indeed. Where I write horror, he's got a horror drawing where it tends to be more
mechanistic in a computer story, for example. It's neat and it's laid out. And you're immediately
get the feel of the story. You did not work with him in the preparation? No. In this case, no, I
haven't. I've been all across the spectrum with artists working, sometimes not knowing who they
are. Some of them I never did find out who they were. And in other cases, I've written stories
from a painting. An editor will buy a painting he likes and say, hey, I got no story to go with
this. I want to get into that subject in just a moment. But let me ask you first of all, Lloyd
Beggel, do you have a feeling sometimes that illustrations have a tendency to drive out good
writing, perhaps? I had an interesting experience with a novel of mine called Delight That Never Was,
which coincidentally is a novel about art. And the cover painting for the paperback book was done
by Kelly Freese, who was excellent. And the scene that he drew for the cover painting does not occur
in the book anywhere. But in that scene, he delineates one of the major themes of the novel
beautifully. The cover could stand entirely by itself. It tells its own story, which is entirely
different from the story of my novel. But it delineates the theme of the novel. And with the
novel, of course, in conjunction, then it means something additional. Now, if he had done a series
of interior drawings on that nature, the reader would have been horribly confused, because again,
they would have nothing to do with the story, even if he caught the theme in some way of what the
story was about. So in your view, it did add. It wasn't a... It did add. And in those circumstances,
the cover, yes. You know, there's an interesting parallel. We in radio, all these years, have
been convinced that it's an ideal medium for the imaginative, as opposed to, let's say, a film or
television. In other words, you leave so much up to the imagination of the listener, and you don't
see it. It can be done very well in radio, but they're ruined the minute you see it. Now,
isn't this true to some degree of a science fiction story? The minute you illustrate it,
you take away from the reader the opportunity to make a concept of his own.
This is true. I say a picture is worth a thousand words, but sometimes the reader's imagination
is worth ten thousand words. So it happens that way. Also, it works both ways as far as
art and illustration. If you make a differentiation between the two, I have a French edition of my
novel More Than Human, illustrated by a French artist, the name is Girard. The guy is an
extraordinary artist. And the illustrations, the pictures in the book are good art, but poor
illustration. I mean, they don't have that, as you said, quality of feel. Or the feel they have
is not the same as the feel of the story. Once again, when you're illustrating a story,
it's sometimes very important not to add too much to the story or give away the story, particularly
in short stories. You have to be very careful not to give away the punchline or the end of the
story in advance. There's one in Visions and Ventures that, after I read the story, the immediate
illustration that sprung into my mind looked very nice and everything. And then I realized I couldn't
do it because it would tell the punchline at the end of the story before it would just be
anticlimactic when they read the story. Do you differentiate in your own mind between, as Mr.
Sturgeon has said, a work of art and an illustration? No, no, I don't. An illustration can be a work
of art. An illustration should be a work of art. Not can be, but it really should be. Not all works
of arts are illustration, but a good illustration should be a work of art. I absolutely agree with
you with that. The difference I made particularly is one in the net French book, struck me particularly
because nobody could fault the man as an artist. His black and white are simply extraordinary.
He used a combination of, I think, Fine Pen and Airbrush in black and white and simply amazing
work that he did. But they were not good illustrations as far as the story was concerned.
No, of course, the ones that you mentioned, Wyeth, for example, I remember he did a,
do you remember Howard Pyle's book of pirates? And did Wyeth do those illustrations?
I think so.
They were gorgeous illustrations and real art. I know a question about it.
Yeah, the way back when novels were first coming out and illustration was a part of it,
I mean way back. Gustav Dorey was one of, and he's still referred to as an illustrator,
but these are works of art and too many people, I don't think you can differentiate between artist
and illustrator, not really. A good illustrator is an artist. Not all artists are good illustrators.
Again, it's a subclass. You can have marvelous art that is not illustrator.
That was just my point. In this case, a fine artist was not a good illustrator.
Many times certain illustrations by a particular illustrator become very much identified
with the story and with the character. I mean Dickens or Alice in Wonderland.
Other illustrators have tried to illustrate them.
Oh, no, Alice without Tony's illustrations.
But to me, as an original, we'll probably always simply accompany that story.
I really feel that a lot of that is that it's a great story which inspires the first artist to
get their hands on it. And the definition of the identification is with the first man that does it.
And if he does it properly, nobody else can do it.
It is deserved to be repeated.
No.
Lloyd, Mr. Sturgeon, a moment ago mentioned this business of commissioning a story to go along
with an already prepared illustration. And you've written about this in one of the introductions to
your stories. What's your feeling about this? Do you think this is degrading the writer?
I thought it was a challenge to try it. I've just done it once.
I don't think I would like to write very much. I don't want to make my own pictures.
Well, you come over to the other side of the field for a while. This is what we do all the time.
I've always found it the same thing as a challenge. I've done it a number of times.
As a matter of fact, one of the stories in Vision's Inventory is One Foot in the Grave.
Weird Tales bought a cover. A very strange painting by Joe Pugnani.
And nobody could make any sense of it. The editor had bought it because he liked it.
I had the job of writing a story into it. It wasn't easy, but I got it all in.
In this new book of yours, Vision's Inventurers, is the cover illustration done by you?
It's done by a different person. I noticed that in the Gordon Dixon Pro, which I have in front of
me, there again, the cover illustration is by someone else. Does that create problems?
Yes, it does. Part of the reason that I do not do a lot of color work on partially colorblind.
No kidding.
And the balance of black and white is what I feel I do best and what I enjoy doing.
You certainly do it well. There's no question about that.
But the person that did the cover on Pro had never seen my black and white interiors when
he did the cover. And as a result, it's particularly noticeable on the hero who's in the front and
on the aliens in the background. Because Gordy and I worked very long and hard on trying to figure
out just what the aliens looked like. And the cover alien is something entirely different.
Well, I noticed the uniform on the man in there is different from the uniform that you have in
wearing. So the cover, I suppose, is there to get you inside the story. And then once you're inside,
the illustrator is going to have to be much closer to the story.
You know, the thing is that the cover should be able to draw you in and truly reflect the story.
Too often, the cover has nothing to do with the story.
It's a grabber.
That's essentially all they're attempting to do is to put something there that looks science,
fictiony, that will grab your eye and make you pick it up and read it. And I really don't have any
objections with them wanting to grab you and make you pick it up and read it. But I think they
should be able to do it and truly reflect what's inside the book. I think that too many people
sometimes get this really bad feeling because the cover and the book do not reflect one another.
Gordon Dixon isn't here to defend himself, but I'd like to just use this as a kickoff for a
discussion of this business of working the author, working together with the illustrator.
In his book Pro, well right here on page two, for instance, he says,
in her white slacks and shirt with only the Med Service badge for color on the pocket,
she was a vibrant sight. Her hair was as black as a city and etc. And I look across the page at
your illustration and to note that the Med Service badge is on her sleeve rather than her pocket.
But then I went on to read and everywhere else through the book, Gordon Dixon refers to the
patch as being on the sleeve. And this raises an interesting question. Is this our forgetful
authors? No, no, it's just that the lady had two shirts. Two shirts. And that has happened, you know.
It's perfectly understandable, but I was just struck by that right at the beginning.
I'll tell the funnier one than that of myself. I did a novel called the Still Small Voice of
Trumpets, in which I very carefully designed an alien trumpet. And I insisted when they were going
to put the trumpeter on the jacket of the hardcover edition that I approved the drawing first. So
we had these one arm trumpet players and he drew one of those for the jacket. So I very carefully
went over the trumpet and made certain and exchanged letters with the artists and got that
trumpet exactly the way that I wanted it and we were all pleased. And several years later,
someone came to me and said, why is the trumpeter holding his trumpet in the wrong hand?
And I had completely overlooked the fact that all these trumpeters were missing the left arm and
the artist Jewett trumpeter holding the trumpet in his left arm. We've had other experiences like
that have you not? I think all authors have had this kind of experience. It would be a little
probably a slightly immediate subject to mind, but you have to, I think, quickly mention your
career as a cellist. It's a funny story, really. Do you mind? Very quickly. Yes, well, I've been a
clarinetist since I was nine years old and I got the advanced copy of the Dust Jacket on a new
novel which had a little biography on it and this means that Doubleday already had printed
up enough for the first edition of the book and they sent me a few. And the biography said,
although he now is a full-time writer, he formerly was a musician and he still enjoys
playing the cello and chamber music in his native state of Michigan. So I got a hold of my editor
Doubleday and I said I've been a clarinetist since I was nine years old. Where did you get the idea
that I played the cello? And she said, well, it's a beautiful instrument and if you start lessons
right now, perhaps for the time the book is published, we'll be telling the truth. So I finally
got things stopped so they would stop calling me a cellist, including catching the same error a
couple of years later before it got in the print. And then I got the British edition of this same
book and the British publisher based the copy on the American edition and now I am an internationally
famous cellist. Well, we'll invite you to perform. That's going to come along. Back on the other
subject there was, if I might put in one thing that helps really, is that when I went through and read
another book I was illustrating, the author had two completely different descriptions in size
of an alien in the front and the back. And I caught it where the editors hadn't caught it or anything
because I was reading for illustrating, the editors were simply reading to correct.
And in that particular case I was able to catch it, point it out and they changed one so that the
two of them matched. This kind of thing is awfully easy to do in a 300 page book. It is indeed. Or for
that matter in a television show, I had that experience in television too where one of my lines
was knocked out of a, it was a Star Trek as a matter of fact, because they brought in another actor
and they used a few more frames and they had to cut somewhere so they cut that.
They had their noses so close to the production that they overlooked the fact that that particular
line is the one that brought the entire plot into it. The only thing that made the entire plot mean
anything so that without it the whole show would have been absolutely nothing. And it happened
to be on the set at the time and able to correct it. But you are not always that lucky.
No, it is very strange when you are reading a novel. I sit down with a pad and I will go through
the manuscript and underscore descriptions of persons and write down. And I have not run across
it yet but I am sure that someday I will find that he has black hair in the beginning and by
that time it is very easy to lose sight of the broad range when you are right down close to it.
Did you think that when these errors are made it is more often the fault of the author than the
illustrator? No, it is quite often the illustrator does not even have a manuscript. He has got some
art director that has told him the type of picture he wants and he draws. There was another very
interesting one. This was for one of Gordy's books. I was sitting talking to him and he was very
unhappy with the cover that they had done for it. Very, very unhappy. And I had read the story so
I had a pad in front and I made a very quick sketch of maybe two or three minutes
and said I had always thought this would be kind of a nice cover just a black and white sketch.
And he said I love it. Can I have a copy of it? So I said here, sure, take the original.
So he turned around without my knowledge, sent it off to the people that were putting the book
and they liked it and wrote me back and asked if they could use it as the basis for a drawing.
And I said sure, no problem. So they did. Well, it's about a sword and this sword plays a prominent
part in the cover sketch which actually has two prongs coming out of a piece that covers the hand
completely. It covers the hand. And I had simply made two quick lines. When it came out in the cover,
the illustrator had made it a saber that is wide as the two lines of the prongs of the sword.
He filled in between them and made it one. Because he had obviously not read the story,
but here I had just two lines very quickly made and he closed them up.
Gross errors are very disconcerting. But so many of them as you pointed out are the large errors
that your heavy nose too close to it to be able to see. I've had a left-handed villain where the
whole plot turned on his left-handedness drawing wielding a knife with his right hand. And six
fingered people described throughout a novel are drawn with five fingers. Things like such as this.
Well, again, I think this is because I think that the illustrators really don't see the manuscripts.
They aren't even allowed to see them. The art director comes in and describes what he wants,
and that's what he gets. Yeah, I think I wish it could be virtually a rigorous law or a convention
that the artist read. Also, the people who write book jackets. Again, that's a little bit for the
immediate subject. But I got it. It ought to be in writers' contracts that the people who write
blurbs on book jackets will have read a copy of the book.
Well, good. We can't blame either the illustrators or the authors,
but the absent editors will have to take the blame right here.
You know, you do have a point there. It really should be up to an editor to go over the whole
thing, complete the illustrations and the book, and one final check to see that everything conforms.
That really would solve the problem. You put your finger on it. I don't want to resolve myself,
or I've pulled bubbles like that, and I have changing the color of the hair or something,
but it's up to an editor to jump on those things, and they don't always.
So occasionally, a very good copy editor will catch such mistakes, and you receive a query when
you get the copy edited manuscript back saying his hair is brown on page 14.
Funk and Wagnos, a company, was always meticulous about that,
maybe because they were involved with dictionaries and so on. They're staffed by a bunch of lexicographers.
There was that you that had, Lloyd, that had, where a copy editor caught an error in grammar
in an alien language. I think that was Stanley Schmidt.
Yes, that's right. We were talking to Stanley yesterday, and he had made up an alien language.
And the copy editor caught an error in grammar, which they had deduced from reading the story.
That copy editor was really on top of it. It seems like it's a very short step from illustrating
science fiction writing to stage design, costume design for films and television shows.
Have you gone that step, Jim? No, I haven't gone into that at all. I would like to get into it
eventually, but as a full-time illustrator, I'm fairly new to the field. I've only been
full-time illustrating one year. Is that right? I've been an artist for approximately 25 years
professionally, but full-time illustrator only for the past year. And so I haven't gotten into that
yet. I'm looking forward to it. The fans, however, if you go to a science fiction convention and see
that costume ball, there's some of the costumes that are absolutely beautiful, absolutely beautiful,
and taken from illustrations in science fiction magazines, as well of course as television
in the movies. But some of them are absolutely breathtaking and very meticulously done from
the stories and from the illustrations in magazines. Well, it's the fans that always pull us up short
when we make mistakes. Oh, yes. It really is. They read much closer than I write.
Gentlemen, it's been delightful talking with you. I want to thank you all very much for discussing
this very important subject of art illustration and science fiction writing. Theodore Sturgeon
and Lloyd Bigel are present authors and illustrator James R. Otbert. Thank you for joining me today.
Thank you, Ed. Thank you very much. Thank you.